---
layout: post
title:  "A basic introduction to my research"
date:   2020-05-17 18:00:00 +0200
categories: research
tags: research
---
The problem faced by cosmologists is that the evolution of the
Universe seems to be dominated by two components that we don't
understand on the particle level: [dark
matter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_matter) and [dark
energy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_energy). We call them
**dark** because we cannot see them. Herein lies the main difficulty
of cosmology. We can only study the dark component through what we
_can_ see: galaxies. Galaxies cluster together in regions where the
dark matter has condensed into massive haloes that outweigh the
galaxies by up to 100 times. Our most extreme laboratories are
clusters of galaxies, behemoths that pack hundreds to even thousands of
galaxies inside a volume similar to our [local
group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_Group). These are the
objects that I use to learn more about cosmology.

<figure>
<img src="/assets/img/eagle_dark_matter.png">
<figcaption>Dark matter condenses into a cosmic web under the pull of gravity. Credit: The Eagle simulation project</figcaption>
</figure>

My research focusses on studying the interaction between the
[baryons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baryon) inside and outside
clusters of galaxies, what non-physicists would call matter, and dark
matter on cosmological scales (millions of lightyears). We are able to
predict the behaviour of dark matter on these scales very well:
whatever the actual physical particles that consitute the dark matter
may be, we know that they can only feel gravity. This makes predicting
the behaviour of dark matter on cosmological scales relatively simple:
we can run [large
simulations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-body_simulation) with
billions of particles and study their evolution. We find that they
condense into a [cosmic
web](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observable_universe#Large-scale_structure)
under the influence of gravity.

Paradoxically, the evolution of normal matter on cosmological scales
is harder to predict. To understand its behaviour, we need to
understand many complex physical processes such as the interaction
between [supernovae](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supernova)
explosions and the gas inside galaxies ([the interstellar
medium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interstellar_medium)) and how
[supermassive black
holes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supermassive_black_hole) at the
center of galaxies eject the gas that they have accreted. Our main
avenue to understanding these processes is through [cosmological
hydrodynamical simulations](http://icc.dur.ac.uk/Eagle/). We try
changing the physical processes in the simulations and see whether we
can reproduce the observed Universe.

I am interested in the boundary between our theoretical understanding
of the Universe and the observations that we have available. I don't
like theories that cannot be tested. I also don't like theories that
are overly simplified. To this end, I try to find the sweet-spot
between simplicity and complexity that allows us to learn something
useful about the Universe. In practice this means that I try to
include the messiness of galaxy formation processes into the analysis
of observations to extract cosmological information.
